README.md, before:

# Parquet Frontend-only prototype

## Installation

Install `uv` and `npm`.

Install the required packages:

```
npm install
uv sync
uv pip install -e .
```

Build the JS/CSS:

```
npm run build
```

In most cases, you don't need to actually log in locally.
For integration testing, you can set the `PUDL_VIEWER_INTEGRATION_TEST` environment variable to `true`.
This will automatically create a test user that bypasses Auth0 and has already accepted the privacy policy.

But if you're testing something related to the login flow, you will need to set that up:

1. Set up your auth0 environment variables (see below)
2. Set up the database:

```
docker compose up -d
docker compose exec eel_hole uv run flask db upgrade
```

## Running this thing locally

We have a docker compose file, but *make sure to build the JS/CSS first*:

```bash
$ npm run build
...
$ docker compose build && docker compose up
```

If you want to skip the auth0 setup for integration testing, set the `PUDL_VIEWER_INTEGRATION_TEST` env var:

```bash
$ PUDL_VIEWER_INTEGRATION_TEST=true docker compose up
```

This creates a test user that can log in and access preview functionality.

You'll still need to set up the users table in the database, though:

```
docker compose exec eel_hole uv run flask db upgrade
```


## auth0 setup

You will have to set some auth0 environment variables -
see the `[envrc-template](./envrc-template)` for which ones.
If you are using a tool like `[direnv](https://direnv.net/)`,
you probably want to just copy that template to `.envrc`
and update the values with ones you get from
[the auth0 dashboard](https://manage.auth0.com/dashboard).

Finding the values of the variables depends on whether
you're using the shared Catalyst auth0 tenant account
or making your own tenant account.

### Catalyst members

Log in to https://manage.auth0.com/dashboard using the inframundo auth0 credentials
in our password manager.

Go to Applications (it's the triple stack on the left) -> [dev-dx] PUDL Viewer
and click "Settings"
to find the env variables you need from envrc-template.

### Everyone else

Go to https://manage.auth0.com/dashboard and register as a tenant.

Register your local development environment as an application
with the following settings:

* Name: whatever you like, but f"eelhole@{your_dev_machine}" is easy to remember
* Application Type: Regular Web App
* Configure options for user authentication: Social (& select whatever you prefer for dev)

Once at the application dashboard, go to Settings
to find the env variables you need from envrc-template.

While you're there, set the Application URIs to localhost addresses as follows:

* Allowed Callback URLs: http://127.0.0.1:8080/callback
* Allowed Logout URLs: http://127.0.0.1:8080

If you are using `localhost` instead of `127.0.0.1` to access your app,
set those callback and logout URLs with `localhost`.

## Tests

To run the unit tests:

```
$ uv run pytest tests/test_*
```

To run the integration tests:

```
$ # If you haven't gotten playwright set up, you'll need to run `playwright install chromium` to give it *some* browser to drive
$ uv run playwright install chromium
$ PUDL_VIEWER_INTEGRATION_TEST=true docker compose up
$ uv run pytest tests/integration
```

This uses `playwright` to run through some user flows.
Make sure you have a stable Internet connection, otherwise you'll hit a bunch of timeouts.

## Feature Flags
In order to make testing out features more convenient, you can toggle feature flags in a query parameter in the url or via a config file.

To enable a feature flag temporarily during development, append it as a query string in the URL:
```
http://localhost:8080/somepage?my_feature=true
```
You can also define persistent feature flags via the Flask config:
```
app.config["FEATURE_FLAGS"] = {
    "my_feature": True,
}
```
This allows you to add conditional logic in your code:
```
def some_function():
    if is_flag_enabled('my_feature'):
        # behavior of the feature we want to test
    else:
        # regular behavior
```

To conditionally guard routes with feature flags, use the `@require_feature_flag("my_feature")` decorator. If the flag is not enabled, the route will return a `404`.

For example:
```
@app.route("/new-feature")
@require_feature_flag("my_feature")
def new_feature():
    return "This feature is gated!"
```

Note that a feature flag added in the URL is only accessible after the app has been loaded.

## Running on GCP

See the [Terraform file](https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl/blob/main/terraform/pudl-viewer.tf) for infrastructure setup details.

### Deployment
1. run `make gcp-latest` to push the image up to GCP.
2. re-deploy the service on Cloud Run.

### DB migration
1. run `make gcp-latest` to push the image up to GCP.
2. Run the Cloud Run job that runs a db migration.


## Architecture

We have a standard client-server-database situation going on.

For **search**:

1. The client sends search query to the server
2. The server queries against an in-memory search index. See the `/search` endpoint and the `search.py` file.
3. The server sends a list of matches back to the client

Via the magic of [`htmx`](https://www.htmx.org), if the search wasn't triggered by a whole page load, we only send back an HTML fragment.

For **preview**:

1. Client sends the filters that the user's applied to the server, and gets a DuckDB query back. See the `/api/duckdb` endpoint and `duckdb_query.py` files.
2. Client queries DuckDB (using [duckdb-wasm](https://duckdb.org/docs/api/wasm/overview.html)), which can read data from remote Parquet files.
3. The data comes back as Apache Arrow tables, which we convert into JS arrays to feed into [AG Grid](https://www.ag-grid.com/) viewer.

The database is *only* used for storing users right now.

Commit message:

chore: install prettier + jinja support

README.md, after:

# Parquet Frontend-only prototype

## Installation

Install `uv` and `npm`.

Install the required packages:

```
npm install
uv sync
uv pip install -e .
```

Build the JS/CSS:

```
npm run build
```

Set up pre-commit hooks:

```
uv run pre-commit install
```

In most cases, you don't need to actually log in locally.
For integration testing, you can set the `PUDL_VIEWER_INTEGRATION_TEST` environment variable to `true`.
This will automatically create a test user that bypasses Auth0 and has already accepted the privacy policy.

But if you're testing something related to the login flow, you will need to set that up:

1. Set up your auth0 environment variables (see below)
2. Set up the database:

```
docker compose up -d
docker compose exec eel_hole uv run flask db upgrade
```

## Running this thing locally

We have a docker compose file, but _make sure to build the JS/CSS first_:

```bash
$ npm run build
...
$ docker compose build && docker compose up
```

If you want to skip the auth0 setup for integration testing, set the `PUDL_VIEWER_INTEGRATION_TEST` env var:

```bash
$ PUDL_VIEWER_INTEGRATION_TEST=true docker compose up
```

This creates a test user that can log in and access preview functionality.

You'll still need to set up the users table in the database, though:

```
docker compose exec eel_hole uv run flask db upgrade
```


## auth0 setup

You will have to set some auth0 environment variables -
see the `[envrc-template](./envrc-template)` for which ones.
If you are using a tool like `[direnv](https://direnv.net/)`,
you probably want to just copy that template to `.envrc`
and update the values with ones you get from
[the auth0 dashboard](https://manage.auth0.com/dashboard).

Finding the values of the variables depends on whether
you're using the shared Catalyst auth0 tenant account
or making your own tenant account.

### Catalyst members

Log in to https://manage.auth0.com/dashboard using the inframundo auth0 credentials
in our password manager.

Go to Applications (it's the triple stack on the left) -> [dev-dx] PUDL Viewer
and click "Settings"
to find the env variables you need from envrc-template.

### Everyone else

Go to https://manage.auth0.com/dashboard and register as a tenant.

Register your local development environment as an application
with the following settings:

- Name: whatever you like, but f"eelhole@{your_dev_machine}" is easy to remember
- Application Type: Regular Web App
- Configure options for user authentication: Social (& select whatever you prefer for dev)

Once at the application dashboard, go to Settings
to find the env variables you need from envrc-template.

While you're there, set the Application URIs to localhost addresses as follows:

- Allowed Callback URLs: http://127.0.0.1:8080/callback
- Allowed Logout URLs: http://127.0.0.1:8080

If you are using `localhost` instead of `127.0.0.1` to access your app,
set those callback and logout URLs with `localhost`.

## Tests

To run the unit tests:

```
$ uv run pytest tests/test_*
```

To run the integration tests:

```
$ # If you haven't gotten playwright set up, you'll need to run `playwright install chromium` to give it *some* browser to drive
$ uv run playwright install chromium
$ PUDL_VIEWER_INTEGRATION_TEST=true docker compose up
$ uv run pytest tests/integration
```

This uses `playwright` to run through some user flows.
Make sure you have a stable Internet connection, otherwise you'll hit a bunch of timeouts.

## Feature Flags

In order to make testing out features more convenient, you can toggle feature flags in a query parameter in the url or via a config file.

To enable a feature flag temporarily during development, append it as a query string in the URL:

```
http://localhost:8080/somepage?my_feature=true
```

You can also define persistent feature flags via the Flask config:

```
app.config["FEATURE_FLAGS"] = {
    "my_feature": True,
}
```

This allows you to add conditional logic in your code:

```
def some_function():
    if is_flag_enabled('my_feature'):
        # behavior of the feature we want to test
    else:
        # regular behavior
```

To conditionally guard routes with feature flags, use the `@require_feature_flag("my_feature")` decorator. If the flag is not enabled, the route will return a `404`.

For example:

```
@app.route("/new-feature")
@require_feature_flag("my_feature")
def new_feature():
    return "This feature is gated!"
```

Note that a feature flag added in the URL is only accessible after the app has been loaded.

## Running on GCP

See the [Terraform file](https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl/blob/main/terraform/pudl-viewer.tf) for infrastructure setup details.

### Deployment

1. run `make gcp-latest` to push the image up to GCP.
2. re-deploy the service on Cloud Run.

### DB migration

1. run `make gcp-latest` to push the image up to GCP.
2. Run the Cloud Run job that runs a db migration.

## Architecture

We have a standard client-server-database situation going on.

For **search**:

1. The client sends search query to the server
2. The server queries against an in-memory search index. See the `/search` endpoint and the `search.py` file.
3. The server sends a list of matches back to the client

Via the magic of [`htmx`](https://www.htmx.org), if the search wasn't triggered by a whole page load, we only send back an HTML fragment.

For **preview**:

1. Client sends the filters that the user's applied to the server, and gets a DuckDB query back. See the `/api/duckdb` endpoint and `duckdb_query.py` files.
2. Client queries DuckDB (using [duckdb-wasm](https://duckdb.org/docs/api/wasm/overview.html)), which can read data from remote Parquet files.
3. The data comes back as Apache Arrow tables, which we convert into JS arrays to feed into [AG Grid](https://www.ag-grid.com/) viewer.

The database is _only_ used for storing users right now.
